## F0 - Specification 📐

You will conceive of an idea for a novel character driver with the objective of creating something that is fun to use and provides for an entertaining demonstration.

With the knowledge that one of your colleagues will be required to implement your idea, you will write a precise, detailed specification of the behavior of each syscall the driver must support.

To further ensure your colleague's compliance to your creative vision, you must implement a suite of userspace tests satisfying the requirements below.

### Outcomes:

* Practice specifying and communicating the intended behavior of code to colleagues 
* Further develop your code testing abilities
* Demonstrate your creative capacity
* Simulate aspects of a job on a real-world coding team
* Validate your conceptual understanding of character devices

### What to submit:

* A patch which adds a directory named `firstname_lastname` to the F0 folder of the class repo containing your specification.
* A patch which adds your test program and makefile.

	* Make sure to have compiler warnings enabled (at least `-Wall` but ideally `-Wextra -Wpedantic` or even `-Weverything` if you use clang) and that your code doesn’t have any warnings or errors.

* Don’t forget your cover letter.

* Submit your patches to `final0@kdlp.underground.software`

### Procedure:

0. Brainstorm some ideas and think about how one might implement
the behavior in a real character driver.
Some entertaining ideas may be more feasible on paper than in practice.
To get started, here are some possible categories of ideas
and some examples of choices made by previous students.
You are encouraged to draw inspiration from this list,
but you must come up an original design.

	* Encryption and decryption of text using simple ciphers such as ROT13, substitution, or Pig Latin.

	* A simple game, like a Tamagotchi-inspired pet simulator.

	* A tool such as a unit converter.

	* A simple programming language implementation such as a
[brainfuck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainfuck) interpreter.

	* Something more zany such as a Wendy's drive-thru.

0. Write a plaintext specification for the `open`, `read`, `write`, `close`, `ioctl`, and `lseek` syscalls.

	* You must describe exactly how a user correctly invokes each syscall.

    * You must describe the error behavior and `errno` value for all possible failure modes that come to mind.

	* You must describe with as much precision as possible the state of the system following successful usage of all features.


0. Write at least 4 tests for each of the 6 specified syscalls and at least 30 tests in total.

	* Be sure to write tests for all behavior, including but not limited to:
	
        * Successful creation and deletion of the character device file on module insertion and removal.

        * All features contained in your specification.

        * All failure modes that do not result from extreme system conditions such as lack of resources.

    * Get creative when considering the incorrect usage of your API. Come up with some exotic input data and insane parameters.

    * Don't forget to test for simple memory errors like usage of a null or invalid pointer.

	* When run, the program should provide information about which tests succeeded or failed.

	* If a test failed, include in the program output how the behavior differed from what was expected.

	* Program output should be simple to interpret.

    * At this point, you have nothing to test. Here are some options:

         * The most rigorous option is to write another userspace program that implemements your spec. When testing your test program, modify the testing target to to use the interface provided by the new program. You will not need to submit this code.

         * The quick and dirty option is to be extremely careful when writing the tests and validating your code by sight, and perhaps a calculator or python if necessary. At the very least, make sure your test program is making the correct syscalls with your intended arguments via a tool such as `strace`.

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
