## F1 - Contributing to Open Source Software 🤝

You will receive a specification and tests created per
[F0](F0.md)
by one of your colleagues.

You must implement the character device from spec as a Linux kernel module.

Your colleague's tests should pass when run against your implementation.

### Outcomes

* Simulate the open source development process
* Put your knowledge of character devices into practice
* Demonstrate your reading comprehension of technical topics
* Simulate real software engineering teamwork and communication
* Discern between your own errors and those of others while working with imperfect information

### What to submit:

* A patch that creates a directory
		* There will already be a directory with your name in the f1 folder.
        * You will find the given spec, tests, and a makefile to build the tests
		* Add the files to git and make your first commit.

* A patch which adds a directory named `firstname_lastname` to the F0 folder of the class repo containing the original specification.
* A patch which adds the original test program and makefile.
* A patch which adds your character device and modifies the original makefile to build it.

	* Make sure to have compiler warnings enabled (at least `-Wall` but ideally `-Wextra -Wpedantic` or even `-Weverything` if you use clang) and that your code doesn't have any warnings or errors.
* Don’t forget your cover letter.

* Submit your patches to `final1@kdlp.underground.software`

### Procedure:

0. Locate and examine your assigned spec, tests, and makefile.
	0. The `f1` directory within the assignments repository contains named subdirectories for each student.
	0. The provided makefile builds the tests as the default target but initially there is nothing to test.
0. Carefully review the spec and examine each of the test cases
	0. It will be helpful to begin by associating each test case with the corresponding part of the spec.
	0. If you find any issues, inconsistencies, or ambiguities in the spec or tests, then:
        0. For simple problems, fix the issue yourself as you see fit. You may take some creative liberty but do your best to maintain the intent of the original author.
        0. For more puzzling concerns, communicate with the original author and/or post in the #questions channel on KDLP Matrix.
	0. Think about whether the given test file tests all cases. This will give you a head start later when you are writing `5` new tests.
	0. If you make any changes to either the spec or tests, commit them. This will be the first patch in your series.
	0. If you do not make any changes, then continue without making a commit.
0. Using the now thoroughly reviewed spec, implement the character device it describes.
	0. First, create a subdirectory within the same directory as your given spec and tests named `chardev`.
	0. Use the kernel's
[miscdevice API](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v6.5/driver-api/misc_devices.html)
to register and de-register your character device. This is standard practice for simple kernel drivers implemented as character devices.
	0. Assume any line of code in your kernel module can run at any time in any order, that is to say, your module code is fully reentrant.
		0. Assume an arbitrary number of processes will be accessing your character device at the same time.
		0. The processes will invoke the entry points of your module in an arbitrary order.
		0. It follows from these conditions that any data access may be a
	0. All kernel code is reentrant. Ensure safe concurrent access to driver using  locks
	0. No memleaks, no dangling pointers, kk
0. You may encounter issues with the tests not of your making
	0. Try to fix them yourself
	0. If you encounter any issues such as
suspected bugs,
potential areas of ambiguity,
or possible design errors in anything you are given,
fix them yourself while maintaining the intent of the original author
as best you can.
	0. If its still unclear how to do that,
reach out to original author or #questions
0. Make necessary edits to tests
	0. Build and load the driver. Build and run the tests.
0. When posting your patches, if you fixed tests, first patch will do that
0. Second patch will add driver and its makefile within a new directory within given dir
0. With your finished driver, write `5` more tests
0. Create a third patch to add these tests
0. bing bang boom

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
