### P1 - Add a new syscall 🤫

Add a new system call to the kernel

#### Outcomes:

* Get comfortable with the concept of a syscall from both kernelspace and userspace
    * Learn how userspace programs make system calls
    * Learn how those calls are handled by the kernel
* Understand how C relates to assembly language
    * Write a C program to call your system call
    * Write the same program in the assembly language of your platform

#### What to submit:

* A patch which adds a directory named `firstname_lastname` to the assignment repo.
    * The first patch should add your kernel patch *as a .patch file* to our repo.
    * Generate a single patch from your commit to the Linux kernel using the command `git format-patch -1` within your linux repo
    * Take the `.patch` file outputted, and put it in your named directory (e.g. `cp 0001*.patch ~/ILKD_Assignments/p1/your_name/`
    * Add *the email patch itself* to the staged git files and commit this.
* The second patch adds your C program to the named directory
    * Include a Makefile that can compile it
    * Make sure to have compiler warnings enabled (at least `-Wall` but ideally `-Wextra` and `-Wpedantic` too, or even `-Weverything` if you use clang)
    * Make sure that your code doesn't have any warnings or errors.
* The third patch adds your assembly program to your named directory.
    * Edit the Makefile to add rules for assembling and linking your assembly program using `as` and `ld`
* The fourth patch adds the output of running `strace` on your assembly program as it uses the new syscall.
* Don't forget a cover letter.
* Submit your patches to programming1@kdlp.underground.software

#### Procedure:
0. Start by adding a new syscall to your copy of the linux kernel.
    0. Create a new `.c` file in the `kernel` directory within the linux repo named `kdlp.c`
    0. Using the appropriately numbered `SYSCALL_DEFINE` macro, define a syscall entry function for a new `kdlp` syscall in the `kdlp.c` file that behaves as follows:
        * Takes two arguments, an appropriately marked pointer to a buffer from userspace of type `char *`, an integer specifying the size of the buffer of type `size_t`.
        * Formats a message into a local buffer that includes at least the student's name and the name of the current task that is running on the CPU (see the `get_task_comm` macro).
        * Determines the amount of data to send - equal to the lesser of the size of the kernel message and how much space the user provided (see `min` macro).
        * Copies that many bytes from the local message buffer into the user pointer (see the `copy_to_user` function).
            * Returns a negative error code of `-EFAULT` (errno 14, bad address) if the copy is not successful.
	* Otherwise, returns the amount of data that was copied.
    0. The syscall implementation should take care to prevent any possibility of a buffer overflow.
    0. Modify the Makefile for the kernel subdirectory in `kernel/Makefile` to add `kdlp.o` to the list of objects that are always compiled (add it to the end of the `obj-y` variable).
    0. Add an `asmlinkage` declaration of `sys_kdlp` to the bottom of `include/linux/syscalls.h` (take inspiration from the numerous examples of other syscalls in that file).
    0. Add an entry to the syscall table for your architecture.
        * On x86-64, this is in a special table format located at `arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl` for historical reasons.
            * You need to pick a number for it, put it in order with the next highest number after the last `common` entry in the table
            * Your syscall will be `common` (i.e. shared between 32 and 64 bit userspace programs transparently by the kernel)
            * The name is `kdlp` and the entry point is `sys_kdlp`
            * Take inspiration from the other nearby syscalls
        * On aarch64 the list comes from the modern shared table located in `include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h`.
            * Find where `__NR_syscalls` is defined and increment the value.
            * Just above that line, add a `#define` for `__NR_kdlp` with the next syscall number that is free
            * add an invocation of the `__SYSCALL` macro with the `__NR_kdlp` number and and the `sys_kdlp` entry point.
            * Take inspiration from the other nearby syscalls.
    0. Update the extra version tag in the main kernel Makefile so you can tell this kernel that has your syscall apart from the other kernel you compiled.
    0. Update the config using `make oldconfig` (this should only take a few seconds, and shouldn't require you to answer any questions).
    0. Compile your new kernel with `make -j $(nproc)`
    0. If the command finishes, make sure it was successful: `echo $?` should output 0.
        * If it does not, re run `make` without `-j $(nproc)` to get a better error message.
        * Fix whatever issue you see, and re run `make -j $(nproc)`.
        * Repeat this process of checking the result and fixing any errors until it compiles successfully.
    0. Install your new kernel and its modules `sudo make -j $(nproc) modules_install install`
0. Reboot your vm and pick the new kernel.
    * If all is well it should boot successfully.
    * Congrats, you just wrote your first kernel code!
0. Make a patch out of your kernel code.
    * Find all untracked files, and files you modified by looking at the output of `git status` within your linux kernel repository.
    * Add them to the staging area with `git add` and then run `git commit -s` and provide a message.
    * Format the resulting patch as a `.patch` file with `git format-patch -1`.
        * You don't need `--rfc` or `-v1` or `--cover-letter` because this `.patch` is not getting emailed directly
    * Copy the `.patch` file into your named folder within the `p1` folder in the ILKD Assignments Repo.
    * You can make your first commit for the assignment at this time.
0. Write a C program that invokes the new syscall.
    * Use the `syscall(2)` function from the C standard library to invoke your syscall.
        * Pass the number you gave it in the table as the first argument and then pass the rest of the arguments.
    * Check for any errors and print an appropriate message if they occur.
    * Otherwise, print the message you received from the kernel using the `write(2)` syscall.
    * You can now make your second commit for the assignment at this time.
0. Write an assembly language program that behaves exactly the same as your C program with the following minor differences because you are not using the C standard library:
    * Your program starts at a label named `_start` instead of a function named `main`
    * you need to explicitly call the `exit` system call to terminate your program (trying to return from `_start` will segfault)
    * You explicitly invoke the system calls by following the conventions of the linux syscall ABI (application binary interface)
        * For x86-64:
            * Arguments go into specific registers in order (`%rdi`, `%rsi`, `%rdx`, `%r10`, `%r8`, `%r9`)
            * The syscall number goes into `%rax`
            * The syscall is invoked using the `syscall` instruction
            * The return value is in `%rax` and is either a non-negative return value, or a negative error number (errno variable is a C library concept)
        * For aarch64:
            * Arguments go into specific registers in order (`x0`, `x1`, `x2`, `x3`, `x4`, `x5`)
            * The syscall number goes into `x8`
            * The syscall is invoked using the `svc #0` instruction
            * The return value is in `x0` and is either a non-negative return value, or or negative error number (errno variable is a C library concept)
    * Make sure to update Makefile to assemble and link your program
    * You can now make your third commit for the assignment at this time.
0. Test your C program and assembly program.
    * They should both print a message including your name and the name of executable file when you try them on the kernel you just compiled.
    * Try running `strace` on your assembly program. Capture the output into a file using `2> strace_log` on the end of the command and add it to the repo as your fourth patch.
    * You can also test the error case by booting into a kernel without your syscall (i.e. the regular upstream kernel you compiled or the one packaged by fedora)
        * the kernel will return `-ENOSYS` to indicate that the syscall is not implemented.
        * both programs should print some sort of error message and exit early with a nonzero code.

The following pages will be of interest to a student:

* <https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/ident/get_task_comm>

Conventions:

  0. Assembly files that must be pre-processed use the extension `.S`

  0. Assembly files that are ready to be assembled use the extension `.s`

Refer to the [Linux kernel documentation about adding syscalls](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/adding-syscalls.html) for further guidance.

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
