### A0 - Git comfortable 🥲

Welcome to the class! Setting up a Linux environment is required for the course, use this assignment to get that set up and get your feet wet with the submission process we will use for this class.

Please introduce yourself and learn how to submit email patches :)

#### Outcomes:
* Set up your Linux environment for the rest of the class.
* Get familiar with git and git patches.
* Get familiar with how to submit to the mailing list (`git send-email`).
* Get familiar with the peer review process, which we will use for the rest of the course.

#### Procedure:
* [Set up your VM and Linux environment](vm_instructions.md).
* Install `git` and `git-email`. Run `sudo dnf install -y git git-email`.
* Configure your `.gitconfig`, which lives in `~/.gitconfig`, using a text editor (e.g. `nano ~/.gitconfig` or `vi ~/.gitconfig`).
  * You can pick your default editor by adding: <pre><code>[core]
        editor = nano # Or which ever editor you prefer
</code></pre>
  * You can set your identity information by adding: <pre><code>[user]
        email = youremail@host.tld
        name = Firstname Lastname
</code></pre>
  * You can add settings for sending email patches using `git send-email`. If you are planning to use your gmail address, the following link will help you get set up: <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/68238912/how-to-configure-and-use-git-send-email-to-work-with-gmail-to-email-patches-to>. Otherwise, you can find similar instructions online.
* Clone the class git repository: <https://github.com/underground-software/KDLP_assignments>. Run `git clone https://github.com/underground-software/KDLP_assignments.git`. Change directory into `A0/` within the class repo.
* Add a file named `firstname_lastname.md` (e.g. `joel_savitz.md`), containing an introduction about yourself. The content can be whatever you want, whether it be why you are taking this class, your favorite ice cream flavor, or some random fact about yourself.
* Run `uname -a >> firstname_lastname.md` to append the details of your OS to your introduction file.
* Make a commit out of your changes.

#### What to submit:
* Generate a patchset from your commit and cover letter.
* Send the patchset to the mailing list.

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
