### A5 - Building Character 💪

It't time to write your first driver!

#### Outcomes:
* Get familiar with which system calls can be performed on a character device file.
* Get familiar with how the behavior of a character device is specified by its `file_operations` in the driver.
* Get familiar with how userspace code can invoke kernel code.

#### Procedure:
* You will be assigned a random sequence of operations.
* Add the `ioctl` and `llseek` syscalls to your copy of the driver provided in the [assignment repo](https://github.com/underground-software/KDLP_assignments).
  * Your implementations should be based on the implementations of the read and write operations.
* Write a userspace program to interact with the character driver from class.
  * The userspace program will call the syscalls available through the driver in order of the sequence assigned to you. The userspace program should produce a matching output to what is assigned to you.
  * Your program should check for system call errors.

#### What to submit:
* A patch which adds a directory named `firstname_lastname/` to the assignment repo containing a copy of the provided driver and Makefile.
* The second patch should add the `ioctl` and `llseek` operations to the existing driver.
* The third patch should add your userspace program that implements the assignment and should add to the existing Makefile.
  * Make sure to have compiler warnings enabled (at least `-Wall` but ideally `-Wextra` and `-Wpedantic` too, or even `-Weverything` if you use clang) and that your code doesn’t have any warnings or errors.
* The fourth patch should add a file containing the dmesg log from the driver upon a successful run of your program.
* Don't forget the cover letter.

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
