### A6 - Implement a spec 🫠
You will practice developing a character driver and writing specifications and testing code for it.

You will follow the steps taken in class to develop a specification, tests, and a character driver, and your driver
will behave similarly to what was shown in class, but with a small twist: your character driver should reverse the
string between when it receives it and when the user asks for it back. The lseek and ioctl operations should work identically.

#### Outcomes:
* Get familiar with how a character driver spec is formatted and how thorough the tests need to be.
* Get comfortable following a spec in the context of writing a character driver.
* Get comfortable with writing simple character drivers.

#### Procedure:
* Make a new new directory named `firstname_lastname/` within the A6 folder and write your specification in a markdown file.
* Write a test program and a makefile that compiles it. You can load our dummy character driver that just logs operations
  while writing your test program so that you have a file you can interact with (obviously though it won't pass the tests).
* Create a character driver adhering to the spec and passing your test program, add support for compiling it to the makefile.

#### What to submit:
* The first patch should create your directory with the spec inside.
* The second patch should add the test program and Makefile.
* The third patch should add the character driver and modify the Makefile so it can be compiled.
* Don't forget a cover letter.
