### E2 - Your first kernel module 🍿

You will specify, implement, and test a simple kernel module that creates a `kdlp` entry in the Linux kernel's
[`/proc`](https://docs.kernel.org/filesystems/proc.html)
filesystem with a basic read only interface that returns a unchanging message that includes the student's name.

#### Outcomes:
* Get familiar with the internals of Linux's [`/proc`](https://docs.kernel.org/filesystems/proc.html) filesystem.
* Learn how to specify the behavior of a kernel module (/ software in general) with a guided example.
* Get familiar with software testing, how to write good tests, and how to develop code using tests as a guide.
* Write your first kernel module!

#### What to submit:

* A patch which adds a directory named `firstname_listname` to the E2 folder of the class repo with a filled out copy of the `specification.txt` file.
* A patch which adds your testing program and makefile.
* A patch which adds your kernel module and modifies the makefile to add support for compiling it.
* Don't forget your cover letter (as always).

#### Procedure:

0. Create your named folder in the `e2` directory, change directory into it, and copy the specification template into your folder (`cp ../specification.txt .`).
0. Edit your copy of `specification.txt` and fill in the blanks to fully specify the expected behavior of your module.
0. At this point you can `git add` the specification file and make your first commit.
0. Write a testing program and makefile that exercises all the functionality your driver will have according to the specification by performing operations on the file that it will create in `/proc`.
    * Be sure to write tests for all the behavior (existence of the file, file permissions, behavior of reading, writing, seeking, etc.).
    * Make sure to also test error conditions to make sure strange user input to your driver won't crash the system, e.g. a null or invalid pointer.
    * You should have at least 10 distinct tests that the driver can pass or fail.
        * When run, the program should provide information about which tests succeeded or failed.
        * If a test failed, include in the program output how the behavior differed from what was expected.
    * At this point, you have nothing to test. In order to validate your testing program, temporarily change the hard-coded path of the file it opens.
        * Instead of opening a file in `/proc`, you can have it open a regular file whose contents/owner/permissions you can change manually to see which tests pass or fail.
        * Don't forget to change this back before committing your code (or write your program / makefile in such a way that what file is used can be overridden from the default in `/proc` for testing).
0. At this point you can `git add` your makefile and testing program and make your second commit.
0. Implement the driver.
    * Update your makefile so it can build/clean, load/unload, and test your kernel driver.
    * See the  example kernel module from [the slides](/slides/writing_modules.html) for information about how to create a basic module and build it.
    * The kernel code in [`fs/proc/cmdline.c`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.5/source/fs/proc/cmdline.c) and [`kernel/configs.c`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.5/source/kernel/configs.c)
      contain examples that create simple `/proc` entries that providing access read-only data.
    * Use the newer, better `proc_create_single` API from the `/proc/cmdline` code.
    * However, reference the code for `/proc/config.gz` for information on how to remove a `/proc` entry.
    * Hint: You can do this with three functions: init, exit, and one that generates the data.
    * Don't overcomplicate things.
0. Submit your patches to `exercise2@kdlp.underground.software` by the due date.

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
