## F1 - Contributing to Open Source Software 🤝

You will receive a specification and tests created per
[F0](F0.md)
by one of your colleagues.

You must implement the character device from spec as a Linux kernel module.

Your colleague's tests will pass when run against your implementation.

### Outcomes:

* Put your knowledge of character devices into practice
* Demonstrate your reading comprehension of technical topics
* Simulate real software engineering teamwork and communication
* Discern between your own errors and those of others while working with imperfect information

### What to submit:

* The `f1` folder will contain a directory with your name.
	* Within you will find your given spec, tests, and a makefile to build them.
* If there are any bugs in the tests, your first patch fixes them.
* Your next patch (the first if you determine the tests to be bug-free) adds your module.
	* The module code and its makefile will be created in a folder named `module` within your named directory.
* Your final patch adds additional tests to the provided program.
* Don’t forget your cover letter.
* Submit your patches to `final1@kdlp.underground.software`
	* Your initial submission is due by 11:59 PM the day before you present.
	* There will be no peer review.
	* Your final submission is due by 11:59 PM on the last day of presentations.

### Procedure:

0. Locate and examine your assigned spec, tests, and makefile.
	*  The `f1` directory within the assignments repository contains named subdirectories for each student.
	*  The provided makefile should build the tests as the default target.
	*  However, initially there is nothing to test.
0. Carefully review the spec and examine each of the test cases.
	*  It will be helpful to begin by associating each test case with the corresponding part of the spec.
	*  If you find any issues, inconsistencies, or ambiguities in the spec or tests, then:
        *  For simple problems, fix the issue yourself as you see fit. You may take some creative liberty but do your best to maintain the intent of the original author.
        *  For more puzzling concerns, communicate with the original author and/or post in the #questions channel on KDLP Matrix.
	*  Think about whether the given test file tests all cases.
        * This will give you a head start later when you are writing additional tests.
	*  If you modify the spec, you may need to adjust some tests to reflect these updates.
	*  Your first patch will consist of any adjustments you make to the spec or tests.
	*  If you do not need to make any changes, then your series won't include this patch.
0. Using the now thoroughly reviewed spec, implement the character device it describes.
	*  First, create a subdirectory within your named folder called `module`.
	*  Use the kernel's
[miscdevice API](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v6.5/driver-api/misc_devices.html)
to register and de-register your character device. This is standard practice for simple kernel drivers implemented as character devices.
	* Implement one syscall at a time and focus only on the tests pertaining to that syscall.
	* Assume an arbitrary number of processes will be accessing your character device at the same time.
	* Assume that any of the threads in these processes may be interrupted after any line of code for an arbitrary amount of time.
	* Code designed to run in these conditions must be
[reentrant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reentrancy_(computing)).
	* To properly implement this concurrent behavior, you must enforce mutual exclusion around any access to shared data.
	* As always, no memory leaks, no use-after-free, no buffer overflows. This is especially important in the kernel.
	* Once all the tests pass, make your next commit.
0. Create 5 new tests
	* Try to add new tests for untested edge cases, areas of the spec that you may have changed, or more complicated integrations of multiple syscalls in a row.
	* Your driver added by the previous patch must pass these tests without further modification.
	* Your next patch adds these tests to the existing file.

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
