### P2 - Capture the Flag 🏁

Solve a puzzle and uncover the secret message by demonstrating your knowledge of Linux.

#### Outcomes:

* Learn about the system calls commonly implemented by character devices and how they interact with the file position stored in the kernel
* Get familiar with how userspace syscalls translate in running kernel code within a driver.
* Have fun solving a custom puzzle

#### What to submit:

* A patch that adds a copy of the ctf driver code and makefile to your named directory.
    * There will already be a folder with your name in the p2 folder.
    * You should copy `ctf.c` and `Makefile` from the p2 directory into to your named directory.
    * Add the files to git and make your first commit.
* A patch which adds your solution program and changes the makefile to compile it.
    * Write a C program that performs the right sequence of operations on `/dev/ctf` so that the messages from the driver in `dmesg` match the provided output in `dmesg_log`.
    * Each successful operation will return one byte of the secret message. Your C program should collect those bytes and print them at the end.
    * If the arguments passed to the operation are incorrect, the returned byte will be nonsense.
    * If the operation would leave the device in an invalid state (i.e. f_pos outside of the range 0 through 256), the operation will return an error.
* Don't forget your cover letter.
    * Make sure to include the secret message you obtained in your cover letter.

### Procedure:
0. Copy the driver code and makefile into your folder.
    * Examine the driver code to understand how information flows from one function to another.
    * Where do the values printed to the kernel ring buffer come from?
    * How can you reverse that process to determine the arguments you need to pass to the syscalls?
0. Write your C program to perform the operations and gather the secret message.
    * Initially, it should just open `/dev/ctf` and verify that it got a valid file descriptor then close it.
    * Between those two operations, insert code that calls `read`/`write`/`lseek`/`ioctl` on the file descriptor based on the contents of `dmesg_log`.
    * The buffer argument for calls to `read` and `write` can be `NULL` since the driver does not actually read or write data from it, the size is the only important argument.
0. Submit your patches to programming2@kdlp.underground.software

[Submission Guidelines](../policies/submission_guidelines.md)
