# Lecture 11 - 17 October 2023

## Topics Covered:
* FAQ for first patch of P1
* Everything is a file (in Linux)
* `/proc` filesystem
* A `/proc`tical example

### FAQ for first patch of P1:

**Q:** What goes in the first patch?

**A:** From Joel's 14 October 2023 post in Matrix:
> We are asking you to do something a little bit weird,
> but I think this will clarify: You are asked to make
> changes to the Linux kernel to implement your syscall.
> Once you have tested these changes
> (or earlier to back them up),
> you make a commit containing the all of these local changes
> to Linux and then generate an email patch for this new commit.
> This is the `.patch` file we are referring to in the instructions.
> Then, you copy the `.patch` file from its original location
> to your (new) `firstname_lastname` directory in the P1
> directory of the `ILKD_assignments` repo.
> The commit for the first patch of your homework submission will
> consist of adding this `.patch` file to your named directory.

**Q:** When I generate the `.patch` file for my first commit,
and try to locally apply it, `git am` complains about whitespace errors!
Is this OK?

**A:** Yes, as long as it is in the line above the git version that has the
two dashes and space. This is an artifact of `git format-patch`.
You are welcome to remove this extraneous space from the `.patch` file
before making your first commit,
however we will not penalize you if you leave it in.

**Q:** Why goes `git format-patch` have this behavior?

**A:** The upstream git source code prints the space
[here](https://github.com/git/git/blob/2e8e77cbac8ac17f94eee2087187fa1718e38b14/builtin/log.c#L1205).
Via extensive digging with `git blame`,
we traced the origin of this behavior back to
[this commit](https://github.com/git/git/commit/a004d3f70f1c074f2d9bd55e7a925ff5916ebbeb)
from 2005:
```diff
$ curl https://github.com/git/git/commit/a004d3f70f1c074f2d9bd55e7a925ff5916ebbeb.patch
From a004d3f70f1c074f2d9bd55e7a925ff5916ebbeb Mon Sep 17 00:00:00 2001
From: Junio C Hamano <junkio@cox.net>
Date: Tue, 29 Nov 2005 13:51:27 -0800
Subject: [PATCH] format-patch: do not abuse 3-dash marker line.

Before GIT version at the end of output we used a 3-dash marker;
but 3-dash marker is special and should not be overused.
Instead, use "-- " which is a standard practice in e-mails to
signal the beginning of trailing garbage.

Signed-off-by: Junio C Hamano <junkio@cox.net>
---
 git-format-patch.sh | 2 +-
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+), 1 deletion(-)

diff --git a/git-format-patch.sh b/git-format-patch.sh
index a26d46dba0b1f9..4cd38f34efd84e 100755
--- a/git-format-patch.sh
+++ b/git-format-patch.sh
@@ -239,7 +239,7 @@ Date: '"$ad"
 	git-diff-tree -p $diff_opts "$commit" | git-apply --stat --summary
 	echo
 	git-diff-tree -p $diff_opts "$commit"
-	echo "---"
+	echo "-- "
 	echo "@@GIT_VERSION@@"
 
 	case "$mbox" in
```

Back then,
`git format-patch` was still just a shell script.
We speculate that the space was added to maintain
compatibility with existing code containing the
hardcoded expectation of three characters.

### Everything is a file (in Linux)

This elegant design principle dates back to
the beginning of (Unix) time, a.k.a.
[the 70s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/January 1, 1970).
However, this simple principle is an
oversimplification - consider the existence
of directories.
In reality, the slogan
["Everything is a file"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everything_is_a_file)
is a convenient shorthand for the more accurate
but less catchy notion that (almost) all
resources available to a process on a
[Unix-like](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix-like)
operating system can be referenced by a
[file descriptor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_descriptor).


We will continue to investigate
this concept throughout the course,
but today we focus on one example: `/proc`.

### The process filesystem: `/proc`

Unlike some of the more esoteric resources that
can be referred to by a file descriptor,
the entries found in the `/proc` directory on
any Linux system are in fact real files.

However, they are not entirely like other files:
they are transient.
That is to say, these files are not stored
on any long-term storage
media, e.g. a hard drive.
These files don't need long term storage because
they provide access to information that only
exists at runtime.

Instead of reading the directory
structure and contents from a storage medium,
the kernel creates the files in `/proc` at runtime
and synthesizes their contents on demand.

Specifically, the kernel creates a directory for each
running process on the system named after its pid.
In addition, the kernel provides a "magic" symlink
named `self`
whose target depends on which process is looking.
Any process that examines the symlink
sees it resolve to the folder that corresponds to
the calling process's pid.

This directory contains information about running processes.
For a complete list of the contents, refer to the kernel
[documentation](https://docs.kernel.org/filesystems/proc.html) and the
[manpage](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/proc.5.html).


Unfortunately,
`/proc` also contains many
miscellaneous files that were added
before the community developed `/sys`.
They are  still present to preserve
backwards compatibility.

### A `/proc`tical example

In bash, `$$` is a
[special variable](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Special-Parameters.html)
that expands to the pid of the bash process.

For example:

		$ echo $$
		1337

This means we can use `$$` when building a path
to reference the `/proc` subdirectory corresponding
to the running bash process.
In P1, the systemcall used the
`get_task_comm` kernel macro to find the name
of the running program.
`/proc` also provides userspace access to this
information. Here is an example:

		$ cat /proc/$$/comm
		bash

We can also discover the absolute path of the
executable invoked to start the process by
traversing another "magic" symlink named `exe`:

		$ readlink /proc/$$/exe
		/usr/bin/bash

If we replace `$$` with `self`,
we are now referring to the child process
the shell created by `fork`ing itself
and `exec`ing the user command:

		$ cat /proc/self/comm
		cat

		$ readlink /proc/self/exe
		/usr/bin/readlink

Another useful entry in `/proc` for
a given process is the `fd` directory,
which contains magic symlinks to all file
descriptors owned by the process:

		$ ls -l /proc/self/fd
		... 0 -> /dev/pts/0
		... 1 -> /dev/pts/0
		... 2 -> /dev/pts/0
		... 3 -> /proc/128523/fd

As expected, the first three entries are
`stdin`, `stdout`, and `stderr`
which are connected to our terminal.
We can also see how the `ls` program opens
its own subdirectory in `/proc` by following
the "magic" `/proc/self` symlink.

## Watch before next class

* [Modules and Drivers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pYbR3lyYOgY)
* [Writing Kernel Modules](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-Yw6SLFlQg)




