**L0 - 18 January 2023**

[Lecture Recording](https://youtu.be/43FekcQlmN4)

Notes on first class:

* Do this right now: </course_application.html>
  * To get in discord server
* Online Syllabus: <../index.md>
* This is not like other classes!!!
  * The course attempts to encapsulate the ethos of open source development in a classroom environment
  * Introduce the tools, techniques and etiquette of submitting code to the kernel and provide practice with them
  * Practical C coding, and plenty of it!
  * Practical research
* This means:
  * Public submissions
  * Peer review
  * Emphasis on presenting your work and explaining the process vs just getting the right answer
* Why should you care? Why is the grind worth it?
  * This class will let you practice key skills for your career in a lower stakes environment:
    * Practice communication skills that are absolutely invaluable in the tech industry
    * Wisdom from people who already have careers in CS
    * Experience with C programming on a large codebase
    * Experience with git and other linux utilities
  * And, if you are considering a career in kernel development:
    * Instructors are the real deal
    * Guest lectures from senior developers at Red Hat
    * Linux Foundation Certificate
    * Familiar with kernel code base / functions
    * Familiar with mailing list workflow
* Requirements to be able to complete the class successfully (do, or have done this by add drop or you should drop the class):
  * A Linux environment that you have root access to
    * The following are not adequate:
      * The UML CS servers (you do not have root access)
      * WSL (need to be able to compile custom kernel)
    * Recommended:
      * Run Linux in a virtual machine
    * Possible, but not recommended:
      * Dual boot
    * Ideal, but expensive (don’t go buying hardware for this class)
      * Second machine
    * Even if you use linux as a daily driver, you might still consider a VM or dual booting to protect your main install (e.g. from downtime or data loss in case you mess something up since we are working on the kernel)
  * Setup VM ASAP!
    * If you are on Windows or an intel (x64) mac use Virtual box
    * If you are on linux, use QEMU
    * If you are on an M1 (aarch64) mac use UTM
  * We recommend installing [Fedora Linux](https://getfedora.org/en/server/download/) since it is a fully open source distro that upstream pretty closely 
    * Download the iso file for the right architecture (x86_64 for windows and intel mac, aarch64 for M1 mac)
    * Setup vm with appropriate amount of resources
    * Ensure you can connect to it using ssh from your host machine
    * Shut it down and set it to headless mode (no window). Start and stop as needed for your course work
* Go over course policies: <../policies/course_policies.html>
* Introductory assignments
  * Fill out the form on the website. A(-1), due end of day today!
  * Git and git patches. A0, due tomorrow!
  * Setting up git send email, A0
  * Shell. A1 due 11:59pm Jan 29
  * Compiling kernel. A2 due 11:59pm Jan 29
  * We will provide as much help and guidance as we can
    * The lectures until Jan 30 will be reserved for questions about the assignments. If there are no questions, we will proceed with the scheduled lecture material.
  * If you can’t handle the heat, get out of the kitchen…
* In conclusion
  * This class is relatively frontloaded!
  * If you can make it past A2, you will probably be fine.
  * NO EXAMS! 😀
* Do this right now if you have not
  * [COURSE APPLICATION](/course_application.html)
  * Send to kdlp-application@googlegroups.com
* Mailing lists for A0:
  * For UML students: kdlp-spring23-uml@googlegroups.com
  * For LFX mentees: kdlp-spring23-lfx@googlegroups.com

