### A5 - Building Character 💪

It's time to add and use some syscalls!

#### Outcomes:
* Get familiar with defining system calls in a character device.
* Get familiar with how to call syscalls from userspace and how to move strings to and from userspace.

#### Procedure:
* You will be assigned a random sequence of operations.
* Add the `ioctl` and `llseek` syscalls to the driver provided in the [assignment repo](https://github.com/underground-software/KDLP_assignments).
  * Your implementations should be based on the implementations of the read and write operations.
* Write a userspace program to interact with the character driver from class.
  * The userspace program will call the syscalls available through the driver in order of the sequence assigned to you. The userspace program should produce a matching output to what is assigned to you.
  * Your program should check for system call errors.

#### What to submit:
* A patch which adds a directory named firstname_lastname to the assignment repo.
  * The first patch should create this directory and add your Makefile.
  * Make sure to have compiler warnings enabled (at least -Wall but ideally -Wextra -Wpedantic or even -Weverything if you use clang) and that your code doesn’t have any warnings or errors.
* The second patch should contain the modified driver with your implementation of `ioclt` and `llseek`.
* The third patch should add your userspace program that implements the assignment.
* The fourth patch should add a file containing the dmesg log from the driver upon a successful run of your program.
* Don't forget the cover letter.

[Submission Guidelines](submission_guidelines.html)
